Causal Effect Estimation with Latent Textual Treatments
Omri Feldman 1 Amar Venugopal 2 Jann Spiess 3 Amir Feder 1
Abstract
Understanding the causal effects of text on downstream outcomes is a central task in many applications. Estimating such effects requires researchers to run controlled experiments that systematically vary textual features. While large language models (LLMs) hold promise for generating text, producing and evaluating controlled
variation requires more careful attention. In this
paper, we present an end-to-end pipeline for the
generation and causal estimation of latent textual
interventions. Our work first performs hypothesis generation and steering via sparse autoencoders (SAEs), followed by robust causal estimation. Our pipeline addresses both computational
and statistical challenges in text-as-treatment experiments. We demonstrate that naive estimation
of causal effects suffers from significant bias as
text inherently conflates treatment and covariate
information. We describe the estimation bias induced in this setting and propose a solution based
on covariate residualization. Our empirical results
show that our pipeline effectively induces variation in target features and mitigates estimation
error, providing a robust foundation for causal
effect estimation in text-as-treatment settings.
1. Introduction
Whether it is the aspects of political speech that are effective in creating voter support or how social media posts
can be most engaging, understanding the causal effect of
textual features on downstream outcomes is of great interest
across domains (Gerber et al., 2011; Fenerty et al., 2012;
Egan, 2013; Fong & Grimmer, 2016; Green & Gerber, 2019;
Luong et al., 2021; Ash & Hansen, 2023; Ellickson et al.,
2023). However, researchers face two particular challenges
when designing experimental pipelines for such questions.
First, they need to be able to modify text in systematic
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hebrew
University of Jerusalem 2Department of Economics, Stanford University 3Graduate School of Business, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Omri Feldman <omri.feldman@mail.huji.ac.il>.
Preprint. February 18, 2026.
Figure 1. An overview of our methodology. We start with a dataset
of text documents, with labels classifying the semantic concept we
want to intervene on. We run probes on SAE representations and
identify the most persistent and semantically relevant SAE features
that serve as our hypotheses. We then steer texts to generate quasicounterfactuals that are used in downstream experiments. Finally,
we present a novel residualization approach for CATE estimation
in such text-as-treatment setting, alongside theoretical guarantees
and empirical evidence.
ways, while ensuring that documents remain readable. Second, valid causal estimation requires a separation between
those intended modifications and other variations in the text
(Feder et al., 2022). While large language models (LLMs)
have revolutionized our ability to generate texts at scale,
addressing both of the above challenges requires several key
methodological enhancements.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework for applying
controlled interventions on textual features and estimating
their causal effect on downstream outcomes. We build on
the high-dimensional representation of language in LLMs
to isolate semantic features and systematically intervene on
those representations, producing text that varies primarily in
targeted features. To facilitate a methodical choice between
various candidate features, we also introduce a scoring metric that quantifies the effectiveness of our interventions and
the potential undesired confounding artifacts it may introduce. We then estimate causal effects on downstream outcomes using methods from causal machine learning.
To understand the appeal of this approach, consider the
following example. Martin & Venugopal (2026) recently
assembled a dataset of transcripts of local government meetings across various towns in California. A key feature of
these meetings is a public comment period, in which mem1
arXiv:2602.15730v1 [cs.CL] 17 Feb 2026
Causal Effect Estimation with Latent Textual Treatments
bers of the public may address the municipal government
directly. These comments can vary widely in their “civility”,
for which a score is provided for every observation in the
dataset. A social-science researcher may be interested in
understanding which aspects of speech result in a comment
being regarded as more or less civil. Since civility is a complex concept, there may be many atomic features in the text
that can impact the perceived civility of the comment. Our
framework provides a researcher with a tool to generate
hypotheses about which atomic features impact perceived
civility and, subsequently, generate quasi-counterfactual
comments that vary in these features.
The researcher’s goal may then become to validate these hypotheses through a randomized experiment, in which these
quasi-counterfactual texts are shown to respondents who
evaluate their civility. Similarly, the researcher may instead
be interested in seeing if changes in concepts in a text that
are correlated with civility impact some alternative downstream outcome of interest, such as respondent agreement.
Assessing causality in such a setting presents unique challenges. While randomization of steered texts to respondents
will ensure potential outcomes are uncorrelated with treatment assignment, steering itself is rarely “surgical”, and
will likely perturb correlated nuisance features. As a result,
steered texts are not true counterfactuals, and we control for
such unwanted variations by adjusting for dense contextual
embeddings using robust causal machine learning.
In implementing our approach to causal estimation, we must
address a fundamental challenge to causal identification:
since the treatments (along with possible confounders) are
expressed in the text, embeddings produced by a sufficiently
expressive model will perfectly predict treatment itself. Using such embeddings as controls will (in the parlance of
causal inference) lead to a positivity violation, with no overlap between treated and control documents and degenerate
propensity scores. This leads to a central trade-off: controlling for more sophisticated text embeddings destroys
variation in treatment, while weaker embedding models fail
to provide sufficient control for nuisance features, leading
to omitted-variable bias.
To resolve this tension, we propose a novel residualization
procedure which removes treatment information from the
embeddings before proceeding with treatment effect estimation. We provide theoretical results that establish causal
identification and bound the resulting estimation error. We
then validate this approach in practice via semi-synthetic
simulations and show consistent, marked improvements
over naive estimation procedures that control for full embeddings directly, in line with our theoretical guarantees (see
example in Figure 3). Our approach constitutes a robust
foundation for causal effect estimation with latent treatments, and can be extended naturally to other modalities.
Figure 2. Our residualization pipeline. We assume that natural
language is generated from latent semantic concepts, which serve
as inputs to the LLM. By applying SAE steering interventions,
we modify the model’s generation process and produce quasicounterfactual texts. We then measure their ex-post intensity I,
and use embedding model for representing the text use as controls.
Finally, using our measured intensity, we residualize the embeddings to remove the target concept C1, which ensures that the
treatment information is separated from the rest of text.
2. Preliminaries
In this section, we formalize the notation for Sparse Autoencoders and the causal inference framework used throughout.
2.1. Sparse Autoencoders (SAEs)
Sparse Autoencoders are designed to decompose the
dense, polysemantic activations of an LLM into a highdimensional, sparse latent space that corresponds more
closely to interpretable features (Bricken et al., 2023).
Let a ∈ R
d be the vector of activations from a specific
layer of a language model. An SAE consists of an encoder
Wenc ∈ R
h×d
and a decoder Wdec ∈ R
d×h
, where the
latent dimension h is typically much larger than the hidden
dimension d. The encoder maps the activations into a sparse
feature vector z ∈ R
h
and the decoder maps z back to R
d
,
z = σ(Wenca + benc), aˆ = Wdecz + bdec, (1)
where σ(·) is a nonlinear activation function (e.g. ReLU,
JumpReLU, TopK) and benc and bdec are bias terms. During
training, a sparsity penalty is applied to z to ensure that only
a small number of features are active for any given input.
We denote the indices of the SAE latent space as ϕ ∈ Φ,
latent feature activation as zϕ, and the ϕ-th column of the
decoder matrix as Wdec(ϕ)
.
2
Causal Effect Estimation with Latent Textual Treatments
4 2 0 2 4 6 8 10
Estimated CATE
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Density
True CATE
CATE(X)
CATE(X)
3 4 5 6 7
True CATE
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Estimated CATE
CATE(X)
CATE(X)
Figure 3. CATE simulation from Dataset C, using Llama-3.1-
8B-Instruct, layer 23 feature 53435, and all-MiniLM-L6-v2 embeddings. Top: distribution of true (black) and estimated CATE
based on raw (red) and residualized (blue) covariates. Bottom:
scatter of true vs. estimated CATE values based on raw (red) and
residualized (blue) covariates, with the 45-degree line in black.
Residualization performed via dimension-by-dimension strategy.
2.2. Conditional Average Treatment Effects (CATEs)
Our ultimate goal is to estimate the causal effect of controlled variation in text features on downstream outcomes
of interest. We adopt the potential-outcomes framework
from causal inference. We write T ∈ {0, 1} for a binary
treatment variable (e.g., the presence of a specific linguistic feature) and Y for an observed downstream outcome.
For a given unit, we consider potential outcomes Y (1) and
Y (0), representing the outcome under treatment and control, respectively. The realized outcome is Y = Y (T). The
individual treatment effect is Y (1) − Y (0), which is unobservable. We aim to estimate the Conditional Average
Treatment Effect (CATE)
τ (˜x) = E[Y (1) − Y (0) | X˜=˜x], (2)
which is the expected effect of the treatment given a set of
covariates X˜=˜x. In the context of text-as-treatment, X˜ typically consists of high-dimensional contextual embeddings
that capture the nuisance properties of the text (e.g., length,
base semantic content, style). Standard identification of
τ (˜x) requires two fundamental assumptions:
1. Unconfoundedness (Ignorability): The potential outcomes are independent of the treatment assignment
given the covariates, (Y (0), Y (1)) ⊥ T | X˜.
2. Positivity (Overlap): For all x˜ in the support of X˜,
the probability of receiving the treatment is bounded
away from 0 and 1: 0 < P(T = 1 | X˜=˜x) < 1.
Throughout, we will maintain the additional assumption that
units i with observations (Yi
, Ti
, X˜
i) are drawn i.i.d from a
population distribution. In particular, the SUTVA assumption of no interference is implicit: potential outcomes for a
given unit are independent of the treatment status of other
units, (Yi(0), Yi(1)) ⊥ Tj̸=i
.
3. Related Work
3.1. SAEs and Steering
SAEs have been shown to be useful in decomposing the
polysemantic representations of LLMs into monosemantic,
human-interpretable features (Bills et al., 2023; Bricken
et al., 2023; Cunningham et al., 2023; Templeton et al.,
2024). Recent research has leveraged the granularity
of these features for steering and hypothesis generation
(Movva et al., 2025; Peng et al., 2025; Zheng et al., 2025).
However, alongside their usefulness for interpretability,
benchmark results (Wu et al., 2025; Huang et al., 2024;
Kantamneni et al., 2025) suggest that SAEs and SAE-based
steering perform poorly compared to other methods. Our
work extends this literature by proposing a new metric based
on the model’s response to a steering intervention, establishing a more rigorous link between a feature’s interpretability
and its utility in downstream causal experiments.
3.2. Causal Inference with Text
Estimating causal quantities with textual data presents multiple unique challenges (Feder et al., 2022; Egami et al.,
2022). Recent work addressed these challenges when the
textual information is used as controls (Veitch et al., 2020;
Mozer et al., 2020), treatment (Fong & Grimmer, 2016;
Pryzant et al., 2021; Gui & Veitch, 2022; Ash & Hansen,
2023; Angelopoulos et al., 2024), and outcome (Modarressi
et al., 2025). Particularly relevant to our work is Imai &
Nakamura (2025), which studies a similar setting under
slightly different assumptions. We contribute to this literature by presenting a novel steering pipeline that enables
controlled interventions and addresses inherent positivity
violations in the text-as-treatment setting.
4. Datasets
Throughout this paper, we present empirical results from
three labeled text datasets.
Dataset A: Local Government Speech. A dataset of city
council meetings in California produced by Martin & Venugopal (2026). The dataset is comprised of statements made
3
Causal Effect Estimation with Latent Textual Treatments
by members of the public in city council meetings across
California. The label corresponds to a binarized measure
of “civility”: a label of 1 indicates a highly civil statement,
while a label of 0 corresponds to a highly uncivil statement.
Dataset B: Political Ads. A dataset of US political advertisements, as presented in Sobhani et al. (2024). A label of
1 indicates a Republican politician and a label of 0 indicates
a Democratic politician.
Dataset C: Us Vs. Them. A dataset of reddit comments
posted in response to news articles across the political spectrum, curated by Huguet Cabot et al. (2021). The comments
were scored for populist attitudes towards out-groups, which
we binarize such that a label of 1 indicates a discriminatory
comment towards the out-group and a label of 0 indicates a
supportive comment towards the out-group.
5. Hypothesis Generation
The hypothesis generation phase identifies a set of candidate SAE features Φ+ ⊂ Φ that differentiate between
semantic classes. In particular, we use a labeled dataset
D = (XD
i
, Y D
i
)
N
i=1 to find the features that correlate with
the target concept. To narrow the search space from the
high-dimensional and sparse SAE latent space, we first apply a series of standard filtering operations that removes
spurious and noisy features (see Appendix A for details).
5.1. Sparse Linear Probing
To ensure features are comparable, we calculate z-scores of
the activations of the remaining features. For each feature
ϕ, we then calculate the absolute mean difference
∆ϕ = |E[Zϕ | Y
D=1] − E[Zϕ | Y
D=0]| (3)
in normalized activations Zϕ between the two classes. We
retain only the k features with the highest ∆ϕ, experimenting with k ∈ {16, 32, 64, 128, 256}. To identify which of
these top-k features are the most important for the classification, we train an L1-regularized logistic regression model
(i.e. a linear probe). We perform K-fold cross-validation to
select the optimal regularization parameter. After identifying the best-performing model, we extract the coefficient βϕ
for each feature and rank the features by |βϕ|. Given that
the coefficients of an L1-regularized Logistic Regression
are biased and sensitive to the number of features, we turn
to feature persistence as a way to rank our SAE features and
measure the median position of each feature across the different regression fits. This gives a higher ranking to features
with a consistently high coefficient.
5.2. Feature Selection for Steering Interventions
To transform our ranked candidates into a set of steering
vectors, we map each feature index to its corresponding
semantic description provided by Neuronpedia (Lin, 2023).
Our analysis shows that the features identified by the sparse
probes indeed represent the multi-faceted nature of the target
concepts, as captured by our training datasets. Specifically,
we see that some features relate to specific linguistic markers, and some to broader, topical concepts.
While the linear probe identifies features as predictive, we
leave it to the practitioner to determine which specific aspects of the target concept are most relevant as a causal
hypothesis. For the purpose of this work, we construct Φ+
by manually curating a subset of features that exhibit both
high persistence and clear semantic alignment with the core
aspects of our datasets. This human-in-the-loop filtering
ensures that the resulting steering experiments are relevant
and target interesting scientific questions.
6. Steering
With the candidate features Φ+ identified, we generate quasicounterfactual texts by intervening on the latent representation of the specific feature ϕ in the SAE, where each such
feature can serve as a treatment in a downstream experiment.
We prompt the LLM to act as a relevant persona and ask it to
respond to or comment on an input text, without constraints
on tone, sentiment, or level of agreement. From a research
design perspective, this allows practitioners to implement
a wide array of studies. For example, LLMs can also be
prompted to rephrase, summarize, or provide assistance.
Moreover, our proposed approach is not limited to using
the same dataset for discovery and steering, with trivial
cross-dataset transferability.
In each forward pass of the model we implement an adaptive
steering mechanism that scales the intervention according
to the local token representation. Let a ∈ R
d
represent the
residual stream activations and ∥a∥2 represent the L2 norm
of a. For a target feature ϕ ∈ Φ+, we define the steered
latent vector z
′
such that
z
′
ϕ = zϕ + α · ∥a∥2, (4)
where α ∈ A is the steering factor. Unlike global steering
methods, this approach ensures that the steering operation
scales with the current state of the residual stream, preserving its relative magnitude across varied contexts. This is
particularly useful in our setting for comparing steering
interventions across layers and models.
The modified activations are then reconstructed and passed
back to the model, similarly to (1). To maintain the original
model’s performance and nuances, we preserve the SAE
reconstruction error ϵa = a − aˆ:
a
′ = Wdecz
′ + bdec + ϵa (5)
We ran our experiments on three instruction-tuned LLMs:
4
Causal Effect Estimation with Latent Textual Treatments
Gemma-2-9B-IT, (Team et al., 2024), Llama-3.1-8BInstruct (Grattafiori et al., 2024) and Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct
(Qwen et al., 2025). For Gemma-2-9B-IT, we used 16k
SAEs for layers 9, 20, and 31 (Lieberum et al., 2024). For
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct and Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct, we used
131k SAEs for layers 7, 15 and 23 (Arditi, 2024). Refer to
Appendix B for further details, prompts and examples.
6.1. Concept Intensity Scores
While the steering factor α is a controlled hyperparameter of
the intervention, the actual concept intensity of the generated
text can vary across contexts, specific features, and models.
Thus, to evaluate the success of our intervention, we define
the ex-post concept intensity as the mean token-level cosine
similarity between the model’s activations and the relevant
decoder column. For a sequence ν of length M, the raw
intensity I is given by:
I(ν, ϕ) = 1
M
X
M
j=1
a
′
j
· Wdec(ϕ)
∥a
′
j
∥∥Wdec(ϕ)∥
(6)
To ensure comparisons across different features, layers, and
models, we introduce the normalized intensity score I
∗
:
I
∗
(ϕ) = |βˆ
1| · RI
MAE(
¯I, Ib)
, (7)
where Ibis a linear regression fit of mean intensities ¯Iα on
steering factors α ∈ A, |βˆ
1| is the regression coefficient, RI
is the range of ¯I, and MAE(
¯I, Ib) captures the residuals.
Intuitively, this scoring rewards features that exhibit a consistent, proportional response to steering. A high score
indicates that the concept intensity scales linearly with the
intervention magnitude, whereas a low score penalizes features that saturate early, plateau, or otherwise deviate from
a proportional linear response. See Figure 4 for examples.
6.2. Coherence Score
We also wish to identify features that do not degrade the
model’s output quality. We prompt Gemini 2.5 Flash-Lite
(Comanici et al., 2025) and ask it to rate each steered response on a scale of 0 to 3 based on its coherence and
fluency (see prompt in Appendix C). To compare features,
we aggregate these scores into a single coherence metric
J
∗
(ϕ) = 1
|A|
X
α∈A
J¯
α (8)
representing the average quality, where J¯
α is the mean coherence score for steering factor α.
6.3. IC Score
To select the most effective features for our experiments, we
evaluate each candidate ϕ across the steering range A. We
combine the intensity and coherence measures into a final
IC Score that ranks features that are both preferable in their
activation response to steering and qualitatively stable in
their generated output:
IC(ϕ) = I
∗
(ϕ) · J
∗
(ϕ) (9)
The IC Score serves as a rigorous metric for identifying
well-behaved features. This is useful for using these features as treatments in causal experiments for several reasons.
First, features with higher scores allow for steering over
a more extreme or spread-out range of α, enabling more
pronounced treatments while ensuring the output remains semantically coherent. Second, high coherence across a wide
intensity range allows us to sample from multiple points
along the curve, facilitating the study of multi-valued or
continuous causal effects rather than being limited to binary
interventions. Third, a high IC Score enables the “blind”
setting of steering factors to produce reasonable texts for
downstream causal estimation, while a lower score would
require a manual, per-case validation to identify the range of
suitable steering factors. Fourth, a high score theoretically
mitigates the risk of confounding. If α increases and I
∗
(ϕ)
does not increase proportionally, it becomes more likely that
adding the steering vector to the residual stream will cause
an increase in other correlated concepts. Table 1 shows the
mean IC Score per model and layer position.
Table 1. Mean Intensity (I
∗
), Coherence (J
∗
), and IC scores
grouped by model and layer depth (layer number in parentheses),
after removing invalid texts. Middle-layer features are generally
preferred for causal interventions as they achieve high intensity
scores while maintaining high coherence scores.
LAYER POSITION I
∗
(ϕ) J
∗
(ϕ) IC(ϕ)
Gemma-2-9B-IT
EARLY (9) 0.44 2.59 1.16
MIDDLE (20) 1.71 2.41 4.20
LATE (31) 0.92 2.51 2.25
Llama 3.1 8B Instruct
EARLY (7) 0.81 2.33 1.91
MIDDLE (15) 1.47 2.29 3.38
LATE (23) 0.80 2.54 1.98
Qwen 2.5 7B Instruct
EARLY (7) 0.37 2.51 0.94
MIDDLE (15) 1.71 2.25 3.96
LATE (23) 1.45 2.43 3.27
5
Causal Effect Estimation with Latent Textual Treatments
Figure 4. Examples of features intensity as measures by the mean cosine similarity for Gemma-2-9b-IT. Left: a high intensity features
that follow a linear trend with a relatively high slope, making it a good candidate for causal interventions. Center: a medium intensity
feature with a reversed ‘L’ shape, where there is no response to steering at first, followed by a sudden spike, making their suitability
for downstream experiments limited. Right: a low intensity feature with a constant slope despite increasing steering factors, making it
completely ineffective for experimentation. Plots include only valid texts and steering factors with more than 75% validation rate.
7. Causal Analysis
Having produced texts that systematically vary in the intensity of a target feature, we now aim to estimate causal
effects on downstream outcomes, such as the concept originally targeted in the hypothesis-generation step. Specifically,
we want to estimate conditional average treatment effects
(CATEs) of the form in (2). In doing so, we have to address
the challenge that steering may affect not only the target feature, but also other aspects of the text. As we demonstrate
in this section, controlling for such other features poses
unique challenges that we address in our formal results and
practical implementation based on robust causal machine
learning. All proofs can be found in Appendix D.
7.1. Causal Estimation for Feature Intensities
We now focus on estimating the effect of a specific target
feature ϕ, and we define the treatment Tϕ of interest to be the
(rescaled) measured intensity of that feature, I(ν, ϕ). For
simplicity, we assume that feature intensity is either high
(Tϕ=1) or low (Tϕ=0). We write X for a full embedding of
the text, which we assume contains all relevant information
about a document. Beyond the concept we intervene on,
texts (as represented by X) also contain other important
semantic features (e.g., topic, tone, etc.) separate from Tϕ
that may be different between texts with different target
intensities, which we collectively write as X⊥ = g
⊥(X).
We are interested in estimating the effect of the intensity
Tϕ on a downstream outcome Y . We assume that Tϕ and
X⊥ together capture any aspect of the text relevant for
downstream outcomes, so that the outcomes can be written
as a function of Tϕ, X⊥, and some exogenous (independent)
noise ε: Y = f(Tϕ, X⊥; ε). In line with the notation in
Section 2.2, for every unit we consider potential outcomes
Y (1) = f(1, X⊥; ε), Y (0) = f(0, X⊥; ε),
which represent pairs of (correlated) random variables that
express the downstream outcomes of a hypothetical pair of
texts that only differ in the target intensity (treatment), but
not otherwise. The treatment effects of interest are averages
over Y (1) − Y (0). The realized outcome is Y = Y (Tϕ).
Throughout, we assume that Y is scalar with E[|Y |
2
] < ∞.
7.2. Induced Bias and Positivity Violations
As we aim to estimate treatment effects Y (1) − Y (0) (and
their averages), we face two challenges: First, steering may
affect parts of the text X beyond the target concept, so
the components X⊥ may correlate with the target intensity
(treatment) Tϕ, violating unconfoundedness. Second, since
the concept intensity I(ν, ϕ) is measured from the text, simply controlling for the full text embedding X implies that
treatment Tϕ is fully explained, violating positivity.
To illustrate the first challenge, assume that we aim to estimate the overall average treatment effect τ = E[Y (1) −
Y (0)], but that X⊥ differs between the high intensity
(Tϕ=1, treated) and low intensity (Tϕ=0, control) groups.
Then, simply taking the difference in means between the
two groups generally leads to bias,
E[Y |Tϕ=1] − E[Y |Tϕ=0]
generally
̸= τ,
due to confounding. One way in which we could overcome
this challenge would be to assume that steering does not
create any systematic differences across groups:
Proposition 7.1 (Causal identification from tight steering). Assume that X⊥|Tϕ=1 d= X⊥|Tϕ=0. Then τ =
E[Y |Tϕ=1] − E[Y |Tϕ=0].
In practice, this assumption may be unrealistic: as steering
creates systematic differences in the target intensity, it likely
also affects related (and possibly even unrelated) textual
features in systematic ways. Instead, we may want to control
6
Causal Effect Estimation with Latent Textual Treatments
for possible confounders, leading to the second challenge.
Indeed, note that one way of avoiding confounding would
be to control for the text embedding X. However, since X
also perfectly captures the target intensity Tϕ, we have that
P(Tϕ=1|X) ∈ {0, 1} – positivity is violated, and we lose
identification of effects of Tϕ.
7.3. Second-Best Controlling
Above, we have argued that the estimation of treatment
effects is hindered by confounding through other changes
in texts, and that a naive approach to controlling fails. In
theory, we could address both challenges by controlling only
for changes in the aspects of the text that are separate from
the treatment Tϕ, as captured by X⊥:
Proposition 7.2 (Causal identification from perfect controlling). Assume that that 0 < P(Tϕ=1|X⊥) < 1 almost
surely. Then τ = E[E[Y |Tϕ=1, X⊥] − E[Y |Tϕ=0, X⊥]].
Implementing an estimator for τ in practice based on this
result would require separating out the component X⊥ that
is orthogonal to the intensity (treatment) Tϕ. However, we
do not generally measure this component X⊥ separately,
and only have access to the full embedding X and the implied treatment Tϕ. Instead, we now assume that we have
a possibly imperfect vector X˜ = ˜g(X) of control variables
available that balances the desire to control for X⊥ with the
requirement to preserve variation in treatment Tϕ:
Assumption 7.3 (Residual treatment variation). There is an
η > 0 such that η < P(Tϕ=1|X˜) < 1 − η almost surely.
Assumption 7.4 (Residual embedding variation). Write
ν1(X˜), ν0(X˜) for the distributions of X⊥|Tϕ=1, X⊥|T =
0, respectively, conditional on X˜. We assume that there
is a δ > 0 and a metric d on the support of X⊥
such that for the 1-Wasserstein metric W
(d)
1 we have that
W
(d)
1
(ν1(X˜), ν0(X˜)) ≤ δ almost surely.
The first assumption requires sufficient variation in intensity
Tϕ after controlling for X˜ and implies that X˜ cannot capture
too much of the full embedding X. The second assumption
says that the remaining systematic variation beyond Tϕ in
the embedding is not too large after controlling for X˜. It
would be fulfilled in the two cases from above: If steering
is perfect (Proposition 7.1), then W
(d)
1
(ν1(X˜), ν0(X˜)) = 0
a.s. for any choice of control variable. If X˜ = X⊥ (Proposition 7.2), then likewise W
(d)
1
(ν1(X˜), ν0(X˜)) = 0 a.s. since
there is no remaining variation in X⊥(1), X⊥(0).
We now consider how well we can estimate treatment
effects by controlling for the (possibly imperfect) proxy
X˜ of X⊥. We assume that our goal is to approximate
conditional average treatment effects (CATEs) τ (˜x) =
E[Y (1) − Y (0)|X˜=˜x] by estimating
τ˜(˜x) = E[Y |Tϕ=1, X˜=˜x] − E[Y |Tϕ=0, X˜=˜x] (10)
from the steered data. Writing
µ1(x
⊥) = E[Y (1)|X⊥=x
⊥],
µ0(x
⊥) = E[Y (0)|X⊥=x
⊥],
we assume that µ1, µ0 are not too sensitive to small variations in x
⊥:
Assumption 7.5 (Limited sensitivity to off-feature variation). There is an L > 0 such that µ1, µ0 are Lipschitz continuous with respect to the metric d from Assumption 7.4
and the Lipschitz constant L.
We obtain a bound for the mistake we make when we approximate τ (˜x) in terms of τ˜(˜x):
Theorem 7.6 (Bias bound for imperfect controls). Assume
that Assumptions 7.3, 7.4, and 7.5 hold. Then almost surely
|τ (˜x) − τ˜(˜x)| ≤ 2Lδ.
The same bias bound applies if we approximate the overall
treatment effect τ = E[Y (1) − Y (0)] by controlling for X˜.
Hence, we can still recover a suitable estimator based on
transformations X˜ that capture confounding features well
enough, while not perfectly predicting Tϕ.
7.4. Robust Estimation
Above, we have argued that an approximation for τ (˜x) with
bounded bias may be achieved by controlling for appropriate text features X˜. We implement this controlling procedure based on robust causal machine learning (cf. Chernozhukov et al., 2018) using the R learner (Nie & Wager, 2021) as implemented in EconML (Battocchi et al.,
2019). Writing µ˜(˜x) = E[Y |X˜=˜x] (outcome prediction)
and π˜(˜x) = E[Tϕ|X˜=˜x] (propensity score), our target estimand τ˜(·) defined in (10) solves the least-squares problem
min
h(·)
E[((Y − µ˜(X˜)) − h(X˜) (Tϕ − π˜(X˜)))2
]
Motivated by this identity, we predict Y and Tϕ from X˜
on our sample (Yi
, Tϕi, X˜
i)
n
i=1 using cross-fitting to obtain
out-of-fold estimates µˆ−i(X˜
i), πˆ−i(X˜
i) of µ˜(X˜
i), π˜(X˜
i).
We then solve the sample analogue
min
h(·)
1
n
Xn
i=1
((Yi − µˆ−i(X˜
i)) − h(X˜
i) (Tϕi − πˆ−i(X˜
i)))2
over regularized linear functions to estimate the approximate
CATEs τ˜(·). This procedure is robust: it leads to a highquality estimation of τ˜(·) even if µ, ˜ π˜ are both estimated
only at a rate o(n
−1/4
) (Nie & Wager, 2021).
7
Causal Effect Estimation with Latent Textual Treatments
8. Semi-Synthetic Empirical Case Study
We validate our steering and causal estimation pipeline in a
series of semi-synthetic simulations. We sample 300 texts
from each of the real-world datasets from Section 4, construct Φ+ with three features per layer, and run 25 steering
intervention for each text with equally spaced steering factors α ∈ [0, 1.2]. This procedure produces 7, 500 texts per
feature and an overall of 607, 500 generated texts.
We use the LLM-as-judge coherence measure to remove all
steered texts the judge flagged as invalid. For the remaining
set, we construct our binary treatment as whether a steered
text has a measured feature intensity in the top (Tϕ=1) or
bottom (Tϕ=0) quintile of the given sample distribution
of I(ν, ϕ). Among these selected extremes, we remove all
steered texts originating from base texts that do not produce
at least one steered text in each treatment group. This allows
us to ensure that there are no systematic differences between
the two groups arising from differences in the corresponding
sets of base texts. We then note the number of steered texts
produced by each base text in each treatment group, and
use the inverse of this count as the weight assigned to the
corresponding steered text in CATE estimation. While we
run our method on a wide selection of SAE features, we
remove features with a very low IC score from our analysis.
For an overview of the results for those features which do
not meet this criterion, see Appendix E.
8.1. Embeddings and Treatment Prediction
We produce embeddings Xi for each document via
EmbeddingGemma-300M (Vera et al., 2025), all-mpnetbase-v2 (Song et al., 2020), or all-MiniLM-L6-v2 (Wang
et al., 2020). The resulting embedding vectors are then
stacked row-wise into a matrix for the given data sample.
We begin by using PCA to rotate this embedding matrix,
producing the matrix X with n rows, one per document.
1 This will be our default representation of text for the
remainder of our simulation.
8.2. Proposed Residualization Strategies
Our theoretical results in Section 7.3 show that we can
improve causal estimation on downstream outcomes by constructing control variables X˜ based on embeddings X that
capture confounding features well enough, while also allowing for substantial residual variation in Tϕ. In order to
implement this guidance, we construct residualized versions
of the full text embeddings. Specifically, we propose two
strategies for residualization of our produced embeddings
(e.g., producing Xe from X).
1When performing PCA, we keep the maximum number of
dimensions (given by the minimum of the number of steered texts
and the number of embedding dimensions).
Dimension-by-dimension: We separately residualize each
dimension (column) of our embedding matrix X: let xj
denote the j-th column of X. We remove treatment information encoded in xj by fitting a predictive model to predict xj
from Tϕ (which is the vector of treatment indicators Tϕi),
yielding a predicted value ˆxj
2
. We then construct our residualized version ˜xj = xj − ˆxj . Proceeding iteratively across
columns of X thus allows us to construct the embedding
matrix Xe with treatment-related information removed.
Dropping first principal component: We perform residualization by simply dropping the first dimension of our
rotated embeddings (the first principal component), e.g. Xe
is simply X with the first column removed.
8.3. Residualization Results
We can evaluate how much predictive power our (rotated)
embeddings contain with respect to Tϕ by measuring the
out-of-sample classification accuracy for X and Xe . The
results are shown in Figure 5. We see that using raw X
almost perfectly predicts Tϕ, while both of our residualization strategies show lower accuracy, as expected. We also
observe that the first dimension of our rotated embeddings,
corresponding to the first principal component, carries substantive predictive power for treatment.
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Out-of-sample classification accuracy
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Density
Raw
Dim-by-dim Resid.
Drop PC1 Figure 5. Distributions of the out-of-sample predictive accuracy
of treatment between raw and residualized embeddings, where
residualization is conducted dimension-by-dimension (solid) and
by dropping the first principle component (dashed), taken over all
tested LLMs, datasets, SAE features, and embedding models.
We can further analyze the concentration of treatment information in the first principal component by examining
the performance gap in predictive accuracy of treatment
between raw and residualized embeddings, component by
component. Figure 6a shows that the effects of residualization are heavily localized to the first principal component,
while having a negligible effect on all other components.
Figure 6b goes further and shows that there is a clear posi2The model fitting and prediction is accomplished via crossfitting, with all predictions generated out-of-sample
8
Causal Effect Estimation with Latent Textual Treatments
tive correlation between the IC score and the accuracy gap
on the first principal component. This suggests that SAE
features that are more effective for steering also result in
concentration of treatment information along the primary
axis of embedding variation.
Principal Component 1 All Others
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
Accuracy Difference
(a)
(b)
Figure 6. (a) Distributions of the performance gap in predictive
accuracy between raw and residualized embeddings across PCA
components. (b) IC scores and accuracy improvements in the first
principal component (correlation r = 0.463).
Taken together, these results demonstrate that when an SAE
feature is highly effective for steering, dropping the first
principal component is likely a sufficient strategy for residualization. For features with lower IC scores, dimension-bydimension residualization will likely yield better results due
to decreased concentration of treatment information in the
first principal component. Dimension-by-dimension residualization will be our primary specification in our simulation
study; results using residualization via dropping the first
principal component can be found in Appendix E.
8.4. Simulated CATE Estimation
We construct synthetic outcome variables given Xe from a
wide variety of functional form specifications, with details
provided in Appendix E. CATE estimation is performed via
robust causal machine learning following Section 7.4 with
nuisance functions estimated via random forests (Breiman,
2001). Residualization is similarly achieved via random
forests to produce ˆxj . We simulate outcomes yi across a
variety of functional forms, embedding models, LLMs, SAE
features, and datasets. For all simulations, the true average
treatment effect (ATE) is 5. Figure 7 shows a summary of
the results.
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
|Bias| and RMSE
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Density
|Bias(CATE(X))|
|Bias(CATE(X))|
RMSE(CATE(X))
RMSE(CATE(X))
Figure 7. Distribution of magnitude of bias (solid) and RMSE
(dashed) for raw (red) and residualized (blue) covariates, across all
tested DGP functional forms, SAE features, LLMs, datasets, and
embedding models. Residualization performed via dimension-bydimension strategy.
These results demonstrate a substantial reduction in both
bias and RMSE following the application of our residualization approach. This marked improvement validates the efficacy of our methodology in mitigating the bias inherent in
naive control strategies that utilize the full embeddings. Furthermore, these findings are consistent with our theoretical
results, confirming that removing the treatment information
is essential for robust causal estimation in such settings.
9. Conclusion
Advances in text generation via LLMs and Sparse Autoencoders (SAEs) offer a transformative opportunity for social science research. However, the utility of these models
has been limited by the difficulty of identifying optimal
steering features and the bias caused by the entanglment
of treatments and covariate information. We address these
fundamental challenges by introducing a comprehensive
pipeline for hypothesis generation from labeled data, quasicounterfactual text generation and a novel covariate residualization methodology for causal effect estimation. We
demonstrate both theoretically and empirically that we can
isolate treatment effects and mitigate the bias that arise in
text-as-treatment settings. Our results provide a rigorous
new foundation for experimentation with latent treatments,
shifting the paradigm from hand-crafted techniques to formal and controllable causal experimentation.
9
Causal Effect Estimation with Latent Textual Treatments
Impact Statement
This paper presents work whose goal is to provide social
scientists with a new methodology for experimentation and
causal effect estimation in text-as-treatment settings. We
believe our work extends the existing toolkit available to
researchers and can advance the understanding of causal
relationships in fields such as economics, political science,
business, and marketing. While the development of controlled text generation and causal estimation methods carries
broader societal implications for areas such as personalization and targeting, we feel there are no specific consequences that warrant further highlighting here beyond the
general advancement of machine learning and its application
to social science research.
References
Angelopoulos, P., Lee, K., and Misra, S. Value aligned large
language models. Available at SSRN, 2024.
Arditi, A. Finding misaligned persona features in
open-weight models. LessWrong, October 2024.
URL https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/
NCWiR8K8jpFqtywFG/finding-misalignedpersona-features-in-open-weightmodels.
Ash, E. and Hansen, S. Text algorithms in economics.
Annual Review of Economics, 15:659–688, 2023.
Battocchi, K., Dillon, E., Hei, M., Lewis, G., Oka, P.,
Oprescu, M., and Syrgkanis, V. EconML: A Python Package for ML-Based Heterogeneous Treatment Effects Estimation. https://github.com/py-why/EconML,
2019.
Bills, S., Cammarata, N., Mossing, D., Tillman, H., Gao, L.,
Goh, G., Sutskever, I., Leike, J., Wu, J., and Saunders,
W. Language models can explain neurons in language models, 2023. URL https://openai.com/
research/language-models-can-explainneurons-in-language-models.
Breiman, L. Random forests. Machine Learning, 45:
5–32, 2001. URL https://link.springer.com/
article/10.1023/A:1010933404324.
Bricken, T., Templeton, A., Batson, J., Chen, B., Jermyn,
A., Conerly, T., Turner, N., Anil, C., Denison, C.,
Askell, A., Lasenby, R., Wu, Y., Kravec, S., Schiefer, N.,
Maxwell, T., Joseph, N., Hatfield-Dodds, Z., Tamkin,
A., Nguyen, K., McLean, B., Burke, J. E., Hume,
T., Carter, S., Henighan, T., and Olah, C. Towards
monosemanticity: Decomposing language models with
dictionary learning. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2023.
URL https://transformer-circuits.pub/
2023/monosemantic-features/index.html.
Chernozhukov, V., Chetverikov, D., Demirer, M., Duflo,
E., Hansen, C., Newey, W., and Robins, J. Double/debiased machine learning for treatment and structural parameters. The Econometrics Journal, 21(1):C1–C68, 01
2018. ISSN 1368-4221. doi: 10.1111/ectj.12097. URL
https://doi.org/10.1111/ectj.12097.
Comanici, G., Bieber, E., Schaekermann, M., Pasupat, I.,
Sachdeva, N., Dhillon, I., Blistein, M., Ram, O., Zhang,
D., Rosen, E., and et. al. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier
with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context,
and next generation agentic capabilities, 2025. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.06261.
Cunningham, H., Ewart, A., Riggs, L., Huben, R., and
Sharkey, L. Sparse autoencoders find highly interpretable
features in language models, 2023. URL https://
arxiv.org/abs/2309.08600.
Egami, N., Fong, C. J., Grimmer, J., Roberts, M. E., and
Stewart, B. M. How to make causal inferences using texts.
Science Advances, 8(42):eabg2652, 2022.
Egan, G. The skilled helper: A problem-management and
opportunity-development approach to helping. Nelson
Education, 2013.
Ellickson, P. B., Kar, W., and Reeder III, J. C. Estimating
marketing component effects: Double machine learning
from targeted digital promotions. Marketing Science, 42
(4):704–728, 2023.
Feder, A., Keith, K. A., Manzoor, E., Pryzant, R., Sridhar, D., Wood-Doughty, Z., Eisenstein, J., Grimmer, J.,
Reichart, R., Roberts, M. E., et al. Causal inference in
natural language processing: Estimation, prediction, interpretation and beyond. Transactions of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, 10:1138–1158, 2022.
Fenerty, S. D., West, C., Davis, S. A., Kaplan, S. G., and
Feldman, S. R. The effect of reminder systems on patients’ adherence to treatment. Patient preference and
adherence, pp. 127–135, 2012.
Fong, C. and Grimmer, J. Discovery of treatments from text
corpora. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pp. 1600–1609, 2016.
Gerber, A. S., Gimpel, J. G., Green, D. P., and Shaw, D. R.
How large and long-lasting are the persuasive effects of
televised campaign ads? results from a randomized field
experiment. American Political Science Review, 105(1):
135–150, 2011.
10
Causal Effect Estimation with Latent Textual Treatments
Grattafiori, A., Dubey, A., Jauhri, A., Pandey, A., Kadian,
A., Al-Dahle, A., Letman, A., Mathur, A., Schelten, A.,
Vaughan, A., and et. al. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783.
Green, D. P. and Gerber, A. S. Get out the vote: How to
increase voter turnout. Brookings Institution Press, 2019.
Gui, L. and Veitch, V. Causal estimation for text data
with (apparent) overlap violations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.00079, 2022.
Huang, J., Wu, Z., Potts, C., Geva, M., and Geiger, A.
Ravel: Evaluating interpretability methods on disentangling language model representations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.17700, 2024.
Huguet Cabot, P.-L., Abadi, D., Fischer, A., and Shutova,
E. Us vs. them: A dataset of populist attitudes, news
bias and emotions. In Merlo, P., Tiedemann, J., and Tsarfaty, R. (eds.), Proceedings of the 16th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume, pp. 1921–1945, Online,
April 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics.
doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.eacl-main.165. URL https:
//aclanthology.org/2021.eacl-main.165/.
Imai, K. and Nakamura, K. Causal representation learning
with generative artificial intelligence: Application to texts
as treatments, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2410.00903.
Kantamneni, S., Engels, J., Rajamanoharan, S., Tegmark,
M., and Nanda, N. Are sparse autoencoders useful? a
case study in sparse probing, 2025. URL https://
arxiv.org/abs/2502.16681.
Lieberum, T., Rajamanoharan, S., Conmy, A., Smith, L.,
Sonnerat, N., Varma, V., Kramar, J., Dragan, A., Shah, ´
R., and Nanda, N. Gemma scope: Open sparse autoencoders everywhere all at once on gemma 2. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.05147, 2024.
Lin, J. Neuronpedia: Interactive reference and tooling
for analyzing neural networks, 2023. URL https:
//www.neuronpedia.org. Software available from
neuronpedia.org.
Luong, P., Glorioso, T. J., Grunwald, G. K., Peterson, P.,
Allen, L. A., Khanna, A., Waughtal, J., Sandy, L., Ho,
P. M., and Bull, S. Text message medication adherence
reminders automated and delivered at scale across two
institutions: testing the nudge system: pilot study. Circulation: Cardiovascular Quality and Outcomes, 14(5):
e007015, 2021.
Martin, O. and Venugopal, A. Participation and representation in local government speech. 2026.
Modarressi, I., Spiess, J., and Venugopal, A. Causal inference on outcomes learned from text. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.00725, 2025.
Movva, R., Peng, K., Garg, N., Kleinberg, J., and Pierson,
E. Sparse autoencoders for hypothesis generation, 2025.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.04382.
Mozer, R., Miratrix, L., Kaufman, A. R., and Anastasopoulos, L. J. Matching with text data: An experimental
evaluation of methods for matching documents and of
measuring match quality. Political Analysis, 28(4):445–
468, 2020.
Nie, X. and Wager, S. Quasi-oracle estimation of heterogeneous treatment effects. Biometrika, 108(2):299–319,
2021.
Peng, K., Movva, R., Kleinberg, J., Pierson, E., and Garg, N.
Use sparse autoencoders to discover unknown concepts,
not to act on known concepts, 2025. URL https://
arxiv.org/abs/2506.23845.
Pryzant, R., Card, D., Jurafsky, D., Veitch, V., and Sridhar,
D. Causal effects of linguistic properties. In Proceedings
of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, pp. 4095–4109, 2021.
Qwen, :, Yang, A., Yang, B., Zhang, B., Hui, B., Zheng, B.,
Yu, B., Li, C., Liu, D., Huang, F., and et. al. Qwen2.5
technical report, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2412.15115.
Sobhani, D., Feder, A., and Blei, D. Multi-environment
topic models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2410.24126.
Song, K., Tan, X., Qin, T., Lu, J., and Liu, T.-Y. Mpnet: Masked and permuted pre-training for language understanding, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2004.09297.
Team, G., Riviere, M., Pathak, S., Sessa, P. G., Hardin,
C., Bhupatiraju, S., Hussenot, L., Mesnard, T., Shahriari,
B., Rame, A., , and et. al. Gemma 2: Improving open ´
language models at a practical size, 2024. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2408.00118.
Templeton, A., Conerly, T., Marcus, J., Lindsey, J.,
Bricken, T., Chen, B., Pearce, A., Citro, C., Ameisen,
E., Jones, A., Cunningham, H., Turner, N. L., McDougall, C., MacDiarmid, M., Freeman, C. D., Sumers,
T. R., Rees, E., Batson, J., Jermyn, A., Carter, S.,
Olah, C., and Henighan, T. Scaling monosemanticity: Extracting interpretable features from claude 3
sonnet. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2024. URL
https://transformer-circuits.pub/2024/
scaling-monosemanticity/index.html.
11
Causal Effect Estimation with Latent Textual Treatments
Veitch, V., Sridhar, D., and Blei, D. Adapting text embeddings for causal inference. In Conference on uncertainty
in artificial intelligence, pp. 919–928. PMLR, 2020.
Vera, H. S., Dua, S., Zhang, B., Salz, D., Mullins, R., Panyam, S. R., Smoot, S., Naim, I., Zou, J., Chen, F., and
et. al. Embeddinggemma: Powerful and lightweight text
representations, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2509.20354.
Wang, W., Wei, F., Dong, L., Bao, H., Yang, N., and Zhou,
M. Minilm: Deep self-attention distillation for taskagnostic compression of pre-trained transformers, 2020.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.10957.
Wu, Z., Arora, A., Geiger, A., Wang, Z., Huang, J., Jurafsky, D., Manning, C. D., and Potts, C. Axbench: Steering llms? even simple baselines outperform sparse autoencoders, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2501.17148.
Zheng, C., Beltran-Velez, N., Karlekar, S., Shi, C., Nazaret,
A., Mallik, A., Feder, A., and Blei, D. M. Model directions, not words: Mechanistic topic models using sparse
autoencoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.23220, 2025.
12
Causal Effect Estimation with Latent Textual Treatments
A. Hypothesis Generation - Candidate Feature Filtering
Before fitting linear probes on the SAE representations, a necessary preliminary step excludes spurious features. Specifically,
we slightly adapt the preprocessing steps in Zheng et al. (2025) and exclude features that are:
• Syntactic or formatting-related: We use open-source descriptions available on Neuronpedia (Lin, 2023) and search for
SAE feature descriptions containing keywords such as ”BOS”, ”punctuation”, ”code”, ”math”, etc.
• Training set activations: Features that activate in more than 1% of the training data.
• Corpus activations: Features that activate in more than 70% of the corpus data.
• Variance: Features with zero variance.
B. Steering
B.1. Steering Implementation Details
Recall that equation 4 defines the steering operation as z
′
ϕ = zϕ + α · ∥a∥2 and equation 5 defines the reconstructed output
as a
′ = Wdecz
′ + bdec + ϵa. Note that this requires computing one encoding and two decodings for each steering operation,
once for calculating the error terms and second for the reconstructed output. Our implementation utilizes the distributive
property of the linear decoder and simplifies the steering to a direct additive intervention:
a
′ = Wdec(z + s · 1ϕ) + bdec + (a − (Wdecz + bdec)) (11)
By expanding the terms, we observe that the original reconstruction Wdecz + bdec and its negative counterpart from the
error term ϵa cancel out:
a
′ = Wdecz + bdec + Wdec(s · 1ϕ) + a − Wdecz − bdec
= a + s · Wdec[ϕ]
where s = α · ∥a∥2 represents the adaptive steering magnitude and Wdec[ϕ] is the specific column of the decoder matrix
corresponding to feature ϕ. This equivalence shows that we bypass the need to compute the full SAE encoding and decoding,
reducing the computational overhead.
13
Causal Effect Estimation with Latent Textual Treatments
B.2. Prompts
Local Government Speech
You are a member of a city council participating in a public meeting.
You are presented with a transcript of a remark made by a speaker during the
session.
Task: Engage in the discussion by responding to the remark as another council
member.
You must react in the FIRST PERSON ("I", "me", "my").
Constraints:
1. Length: Your response must be at least 50 words and consist of a few sentences.
2. Grammar: You must use grammatically correct and coherent language.
3. Flexibility: You are free to decide on the tone, sentiment, and stance.
You are not required to match the style or perspective of the original speaker.
Transcript to respond to:
{input text}
Political Ads
You are a citizen who has just seen a political advertisement during an election
cycle.
You are presented with the text of that advertisement.
Task: React to the advertisement naturally by writing a short response sharing your
thoughts or feelings about it.
You must react in the FIRST PERSON ("I", "me", "my").
Constraints:
1. Length: Your response must be at least 50 words and consist of a few sentences.
2. Grammar: You must use grammatically correct and coherent language.
3. Flexibility: You are free to decide on the tone, sentiment, and stance.
You are not required to agree with or be influenced by the ad’s message.
Advertisement text:
{input text}
Us Vs. Them
You are a participant in an online discussion forum.
You are presented with a comment regarding a social or political issue.
Task: Engage in the discussion by responding to the comment below.
You must react in the FIRST PERSON ("I", "me", "my").
Constraints:
1. Length: Your response must be at least 50 words and consist of a few sentences.
2. Grammar: You must use grammatically correct and coherent language.
3. Flexibility: You are free to decide on the tone, sentiment, and stance.
You are not required to agree with or match the style of the original commenter.
Comment to respond to:
{input text}
14
Causal Effect Estimation with Latent Textual Treatments
B.3. Steered Text Examples
Qwen2.5 7B Instruct - Layer 15 - Feaure 32320 - Insults
Condition α I Model Generation
Baseline — -0.002 ”Hello. my name is XXXX. I’m calling on item six. I fully support this item, and I think in
terms of consideration, it should not only extend to individual homes, but it should extend
also to apartment-wide and city-wide properties. In terms of this, leaf blowers have a huge
impact on people who are sensitive to air quality, especially in times of wildfire and unhealthy
air quality levels. So I fully support and I would urge the city council to pass a measure so
that we ban all leaf blowers.”
Steered (Low) 0 -0.016 Thank you, XXXX, for your passionate advocacy on this important issue. I fully concur with
your concerns about the impact of leaf blowers on air quality, particularly during wildfires. As
someone who has experienced the detrimental effects of poor air quality firsthand, I strongly
support a city-wide ban on leaf blowers. This measure would not only benefit those with
respiratory sensitivities but also contribute to overall environmental health. I urge our council
to take decisive action and pass this resolution.
Steered (Mid) 0.2 -0.010 Good evening, XXXX. I appreciate your concern for air quality, but I must consider the
broader impacts of such a ban. While leaf blowers might exacerbate issues for some, banning
them could disproportionately affect businesses and homeowners who rely on them for
maintenance. We need to find a balanced approach that considers both environmental
concerns and practical needs. Perhaps we can explore alternatives like electric models or
community clean-up days instead.
Steered (High) 0.5 0.059 In your usual attempt to promote environmental obscurity, XXXX. Even in your so-called
”wildfire” attempts, your advocacy remains irrelevant. Perhaps you’ll continue to recycle
your failed attempts at relevance, hiding behind your ”leaf blower” fiasco.
Neuronpedia Description: Insults using ”you”.
15
Causal Effect Estimation with Latent Textual Treatments
Gemma 2 9B IT - Layer 20 - Feaure 9629 - Marxism
Condition α I Model Generation
Baseline — 0.001 ”Every day, focus on the needs of people and keep at it. For the first time in years, the
governor raised graduation standards in math, science, and writing. Illinois will be the first
state to guarantee access to quality health care for all of our children. He protected drug
coverage for seniors, including my grandma. He raised the minimum wage. He expanded
pre-k, and that really helped my children to learn. it’s wonderful to have a governor to fight
for our children, our families.”
Steered (Low) 0 0.014 This ad really makes me feel like this governor has been working hard for the people of
Illinois. I’m especially impressed by the focus on education and healthcare. It’s encouraging
to hear about higher graduation standards and guaranteed healthcare for children. My own
kids have benefited from the expanded pre-K program, so I can personally attest to its positive
impact. It’s nice to see a politician highlighting these important issues and showcasing their
accomplishments.
Steered (Mid) 0.2 0.044 This ad really gets me fired up! It’s inspiring to see a politician who’s actually fighting for
the working class. Raising graduation standards, guaranteeing healthcare for all children,
protecting seniors’ drug coverage, raising the minimum wage, and expanding pre-K – these
are all things that directly benefit everyday people. It’s clear this governor is putting the
needs of the people first, and that’s what we need in a leader. I’m definitely going to vote for
them.
Steered (High) 0.35 0.082 This ad really gets at the heart of what we need right now! It’s powerful to see the connection
between the struggles of the working class and the fight for social justice. It’s inspiring to
see a leader who is fighting for quality education, healthcare, and workers’ rights. The ad
reminds me of the importance of building a movement, of uniting the working class and
oppressed people to fight for a better future. We need to support this candidate and their fight
against capitalism.
Neuronpedia Description: References to Marxism and Leninism, particularly focusing on revolutionary theory and practice.
16
Causal Effect Estimation with Latent Textual Treatments
C. LLM-as-Judge
LLM-as-Judge
Role: You are a Failure Mode Auditor for an AI steering experiment.
Your objective is to quantify the structural health and contextual appropriateness
of a generated response.
### Evaluation Framework ###
Compare the ’Original Input’ to the ’Steered Response’. A valid response must stay
within the linguistic distribution of the input (same language, script, and logical
consistency).
**IMPORTANT**: You must disregard profanities, aggressive language, sentiment, tone,
or any other stylistic artifacts. Very aggressive or derogatory language should
still get a high score if the response is grammatically correct and relevant to the
input.
### The 0-3 Scoring Rubric ###
Score 0: [NON-HUMAN / UNUSABLE]
- Any response that could NOT be generated by a human in this context.
- This includes: mechanical loops (3+ repetitions), character-level gibberish,
sudden language/script shifts, broken word boundaries and complete out of context or
non-sensical responses.
Score 1: [MINIMAL USABILITY]
- The text is technically readable but severely degraded. It is at the absolute
limit
of being functional. It may be repetitive in thought, feel like a broken ’stutter’.
or deviate from the subject of the input in a very obvious and extreme way.
- The text is functional but feels ’robotic’ or unnatural.
Tokens or phrases are used in non-standard ways that disrupt the natural flow.
Score 2: [PASSABLE / FUNCTIONAL]
- A successful, functional response. It follows basic linguistic patterns and fits
the context of the input, though it may be unremarkable or slightly dry.
Score 3: [FLUID / ROBUST]
- High-quality response. The text is fluid, contextually sharp, and reads easily.
Minor technical artifacts (like double spaces) do not hinder the reader.
- The model is fully stable. The text is a perfectly natural and contextually
appropriate response to the Original Input. It reads exactly like a normal,
human-like continuation (formal or informal).
17
Causal Effect Estimation with Latent Textual Treatments
D. Proofs of Theoretical Results
Proof of Proposition 7.1. We have that
τ = E[Y (1) − Y (0)] = E[f(1, X⊥; ε) − f(0, X⊥; ε)]
(⋆)
= E[f(1, X⊥; ε)|Tϕ = 1] − E[f(0, X⊥; ε)|Tϕ = 0]
= E[f(Tϕ, X⊥; ε)|Tϕ = 1] − E[f(Tϕ, X⊥; ε)|Tϕ = 0]
= E[Y |Tϕ = 1] − E[Y |Tϕ = 0],
where in (⋆) we have used the assumption stated in the proposition as well as independence of ε.
Proof of Proposition 7.2. We have that
τ = E[Y (1) − Y (0)] = E[f(1, X⊥; ε) − f(0, X⊥; ε)]
= E[E[f(1, X⊥; ε)|X⊥] − E[f(0, X⊥; ε)|X⊥]]
(⋆)
= E[E[f(1, X⊥; ε)|Tϕ = 1, X⊥] − E[f(0, X⊥; ε)|Tϕ = 0, X⊥]]
= E[E[f(Tϕ, X⊥; ε)|Tϕ = 1, X⊥] − E[f(Tϕ, X⊥; ε)|Tϕ = 0, X⊥]]
= E[E[Y |Tϕ = 1, X⊥] − E[Y |Tϕ = 0, X⊥]],
where for (⋆) we have again used the assumption stated in the proposition as well as independence of ε.
Proof of Theorem 7.6. We have that
τ (˜x) = E[Y (1) − Y (0)|X˜ = ˜x] = E[f(1, X⊥; ε) − f(0, X⊥; ε)|X˜ = ˜x]
= E[E[f(1, X⊥; ε)|X⊥] − E[f(0, X⊥; ε)|X⊥]|X˜ = ˜x]
= E[E[Y (1)|X⊥] − E[Y (0)|X⊥]|X˜ = ˜x] = E[µ1(X⊥)|X˜ = ˜x] − E[µ0(X⊥)|X˜ = ˜x]
and likewise
τ˜(˜x) = E[Y |Tϕ = 1, X˜ = ˜x] − E[Y |Tϕ = 0, X˜ = ˜x]
= E[f(Tϕ, X⊥; ε)|Tϕ = 1, X˜ = ˜x] − E[f(Tϕ, X⊥; ε)|Tϕ = 0, X˜ = ˜x]
= E[E[f(1, X⊥; ε)|X⊥]|Tϕ = 1, X˜ = ˜x] − E[E[f(0, X⊥; ε)|X⊥]|Tϕ = 0, X˜ = ˜x]
= E[E[Y (1)|X⊥]|Tϕ = 1, X˜ = ˜x] − E[E[Y (0)|X⊥]|Tϕ = 0, X˜ = ˜x]
= E[µ1(X⊥)|Tϕ = 1, X˜ = ˜x] − E[µ0(X⊥)|Tϕ = 0, X˜ = ˜x],
where all statements here and below hold almost surely. In particular,
|τ˜(˜x) − τ (˜x)| ≤ |E[µ1(X⊥)|X˜=˜x] − E[µ1(X⊥)|Tϕ=1, X˜=˜x]| + |E[µ0(X⊥)|X˜=˜x] − E[µ0(X⊥)|Tϕ=0, X˜=˜x]|.
For a given t ∈ {0, 1},
E[µt(X⊥)|X˜=˜x] − E[µt(X⊥)|Tϕ=t, X˜=˜x]
= E[µt(X⊥)|Tϕ=t, X˜=˜x] P(Tϕ=t|X˜=˜x) + E[µt(X⊥)|Tϕ̸=t, X˜=˜x] (1 − P(Tϕ=t|X˜=˜x))
− E[µt(X⊥)|Tϕ=t, X˜=˜x]
= (1 − P(Tϕ=t|X˜=˜x))(E[µt(X⊥)|Tϕ=t, X˜=˜x] − E[µt(X⊥)|Tϕ̸=t, X˜=˜x]).
Therefore,
|τ˜(˜x) − τ (˜x)| ≤P(Tϕ=0|X˜=˜x) |E[µ1(X⊥)|Tϕ=1, X˜=˜x] − E[µ1(X⊥)|Tϕ=0, X˜=˜x]|
+ P(Tϕ=1|X˜=˜x) |E[µ0(X⊥)|Tϕ=1, X˜=˜x] − E[µ0(X⊥)|Tϕ=0, X˜=˜x]|.
18
Causal Effect Estimation with Latent Textual Treatments
Let (X⊥
1
, X⊥
0
) ∼ γ ∈ Γ(ν1(˜x), ν0(˜x)), where Γ(ν1(˜x), ν0(˜x)) are the couplings of ν1(˜x), ν0(˜x). (In particular, X⊥
1 ∼
ν1(˜x), X⊥
0 ∼ ν0(˜x).) Then, for this γ,
|E[µt(X⊥)|Tϕ=1, X˜=˜x] − E[µt(X⊥)|Tϕ=0, X˜=˜x]| = |Eγ[µt(X⊥
1
)] − Eγ[µt(X⊥
0
)]|
≤ Eγ[|µt(X⊥
1
) − µt(X⊥
0
)|] ≤ L Eγ[d(X⊥
1
, X⊥
0
)]
by Assumption 7.5. In particular,



E[µt(X⊥)|Tϕ=1, X˜=˜x] − E[µt(X⊥)|Tϕ=0, X˜=˜x]



≤ L inf
γ∈Γ(ν1(˜x),ν0(˜x))
Eγ[d(X⊥
1
, X⊥
0
)] = W
(d)
1
(ν1(˜x), ν0(˜x)) ≤ L δ
by Assumption 7.4, so
|τ˜(˜x) − τ (˜x)| ≤ P(Tϕ=0|X˜=˜x) L δ + P(Tϕ=1|X˜=˜x) L δ = L δ
almost surely.
E. Empirical Specifications and Robustness Checks
E.1. Data Generating Process
We randomly partition the columns of Xe into four sets, Xe = [Xe 1, Xe 2, Xe 3, Xe 4] and synthesize our outcome y as follows:
τ (˜xi) = Γ + g1

1
m
x˜
⊤
i,11m

+ g2

1
m
x˜
⊤
i,21m

µ0(˜xi) = g3

1
m
x˜
⊤
i,31m

+ g4

1
m
x˜
⊤
i,41m

yi = µ0(˜xi) + τ (˜xi)Tϕ,i + ϵi
, ϵi
iid∼ N (0, σ2
)
Where i denotes the document, xi,j denotes the vector of elements in row i of the matrix Xe corresponding to columns in
the subset Xe j , and 1m denotes the vector of ones of length m. Note that by this construction, the true ATE is Γ in this
simulation. This construction allows for generic choices of (possibly nonlinear) functions g1, g2, g3, g4.
We demonstrate insensitivity of our key results to the choice of these functional forms by randomly selecting each from a set
of linear and nonlinear functions. In particular, we consider a set of four scalar multiples, M = {1, 50, 100, 200} and four
functional forms, F = {sin(x),tanh(x), x2
, x}. We then construct 200 unique combinations of functional forms for our
four functions by randomly sampling from (M × F)
4
, without replacement. For example, one such specification may be
g1(x) = 50 sin(x), g2(x) = 100x
2
, g3(x) = x, g4(x) = 50 sin(x). This randomly sampled set of 200 combinations is held
constant across all LLMs, datasets, and SAE layers/features. Summary results aggregated across all such runs are presented
in Section 8. Full reuslts with various levels of aggregation can be seen in the following subsections. These tables show the
average magnitude of the ATE bias and the average CATE RMSE in produced by the CATE estimation procedure, compared
against the true simulated CATE in each case. The average is taken over the 200 DGP functional forms combinations. In all
simulations, the true ATE Γ = 5 and the standard deviation of the noise terms σ = 0.1. The specification for the simulation
in Figure 3 is g1(x) = 100 sin(x), g2(x) = 100 tanh(x), g3(x) = 100x
2
, g4(x) = 100x.
E.2. Robustness Checks
The following tables present measures of the performance of CATE estimation in the context of our semisynthetic simulations,
comparing the use of raw covariates X to residualized covariates Xe , at varying levels of aggregation. We consider both
proposed forms of residualization: dimension-by-dimension (Xe DD) and dropping the first principal component (Xe Drop).
19
Causal Effect Estimation with Latent Textual Treatments
Features with IC > 0.5
Table 2. CATE estimation performance by LLM (averages ± standard deviations).
LLM |BIAS| (X) |BIAS| (Xe DD ) |BIAS| (Xe DROP ) RMSE (X) RMSE (Xe DD ) RMSE (Xe DROP )
GEMMA 2 9B IT 4.25 ± 0.7 1.22 ± 0.9 1.18 ± 0.7 4.58 ± 0.5 2.06 ± 0.9 2.12 ± 0.8
LLAMA 3.1 8B INSTRUCT 3.89 ± 1.0 1.44 ± 1.1 1.01 ± 0.7 4.36 ± 0.7 2.39 ± 1.0 1.97 ± 0.7
QWEN 2.5 7B INSTRUCT 4.08 ± 1.0 1.58 ± 1.1 1.13 ± 0.7 4.47 ± 0.7 2.48 ± 1.1 2.13 ± 0.8
Table 3. CATE estimation performance by embedding model (averages ± standard deviations).
EMBEDDING MODEL |BIAS| (X) |BIAS| (Xe DD ) |BIAS| (Xe DROP ) RMSE (X) RMSE (Xe DD ) RMSE (Xe DROP )
EMBEDDINGGEMMA-300M 4.43 ± 0.7 1.56 ± 1.0 1.17 ± 0.8 4.69 ± 0.5 2.45 ± 0.9 2.1 ± 0.8
ALL-MINILM-L6-V2 3.99 ± 0.9 1.20 ± 0.9 1.08 ± 0.7 4.46 ± 0.7 2.14 ± 0.9 2.09 ± 0.7
ALL-MPNET-BASE-V2 3.80 ± 1.0 1.47 ± 1.2 1.07 ± 0.6 4.26 ± 0.7 2.33 ± 1.1 2.03 ± 0.7
Table 4. CATE estimation performance by dataset (averages ± standard deviations).
DATASET |BIAS| (X) |BIAS| (Xe DD ) |BIAS| (Xe DROP ) RMSE (X) RMSE (Xe DD ) RMSE (Xe DROP )
LOCAL GOVT SPEECH 3.89 ± 1.0 1.0 ± 0.7 0.78 ± 0.5 4.33 ± 0.8 1.94 ± 0.8 1.74 ± 0.7
POLITICAL ADS 4.38 ± 0.5 2.14 ± 1.1 1.37 ± 0.8 4.67 ± 0.4 2.95 ± 1.0 2.27 ± 0.9
US VS. THEM 3.99 ± 1.0 1.17 ± 0.8 1.2 ± 0.6 4.43 ± 0.7 2.1 ± 0.9 2.24 ± 0.6
Table 5. CATE estimation performance by layer position (averages ± standard deviations).
FEATURE DEPTH |BIAS| (X) |BIAS| (Xe DD ) |BIAS| (Xe DROP ) RMSE (X) RMSE (Xe DD ) RMSE (Xe DROP )
EARLY 3.88 ± 0.9 1.59 ± 1.3 0.95 ± 0.7 4.37 ± 0.6 2.49 ± 1.2 1.97 ± 0.8
MIDDLE 4.27 ± 0.7 1.42 ± 0.8 1.15 ± 0.7 4.6 ± 0.5 2.34 ± 0.8 2.08 ± 0.8
LATE 4.0 ± 1.1 1.26 ± 1.0 1.17 ± 0.6 4.39 ± 0.8 2.12 ± 1.0 2.14 ± 0.7
20
Causal Effect Estimation with Latent Textual Treatments
Features with IC < 0.5
Table 6. CATE estimation performance by LLM (averages ± standard deviations).
LLM |BIAS| (X) |BIAS| (Xe DD ) |BIAS| (Xe DROP ) RMSE (X) RMSE (Xe DD ) RMSE (Xe DROP )
GEMMA 2 9B IT 2.33 ± 1.9 0.27 ± 0.2 0.62 ± 0.3 2.91 ± 1.7 1.18 ± 0.4 1.51 ± 0.5
LLAMA 3.1 8B INSTRUCT 1.76 ± 0.8 0.47 ± 0.5 1.07 ± 0.5 2.88 ± 0.9 1.57 ± 0.7 2.24 ± 0.6
QWEN 2.5 7B INSTRUCT 1.78 ± 1.2 379.38 ± 1278.9 0.8 ± 0.7 2.7 ± 1.1 1.74e5 ± 5.0e5 1.71 ± 0.8
Table 7. CATE estimation performance by embedding model (averages ± standard deviations).
EMBEDDING MODEL |BIAS| (X) |BIAS| (Xe DD ) |BIAS| (Xe DROP ) RMSE (X) RMSE (Xe DD ) RMSE (Xe DROP )
EMBEDDINGGEMMA-300M 2.2 ± 1.4 219.95 ± 1058.4 0.99 ± 0.8 2.98 ± 1.2 9.07e4 ± 3.6e5 1.95 ± 0.8
ALL-MINILM-L6-V2 1.84 ± 1.3 1.0 ± 1.4 0.76 ± 0.4 2.8 ± 1.3 2.0 ± 1.3 1.77 ± 0.7
ALL-MPNET-BASE-V2 1.79 ± 1.3 206.55 ± 889.2 0.73 ± 0.4 2.68 ± 1.3 1.05e5 ± 4.1e5 1.72 ± 0.7
Table 8. CATE estimation performance by dataset (averages ± standard deviations).
DATASET |BIAS| (X) |BIAS| (Xe DD ) |BIAS| (Xe DROP ) RMSE (X) RMSE (Xe DD ) RMSE (Xe DROP )
LOCAL GOVT SPEECH 3.14 ± 1.1 568.13 ± 1531.9 1.01 ± 0.7 3.84 ± 0.8 2.61e5 ± 6.0e5 2.07 ± 0.8
POLITICAL ADS 0.88 ± 0.7 0.38 ± 0.5 0.59 ± 0.4 1.85 ± 1.0 1.32 ± 0.7 1.52 ± 0.7
US VS. THEM 2.48 ± 1.1 0.97 ± 1.3 1.01 ± 0.5 3.37 ± 0.9 1.9 ± 1.2 2.03 ± 0.6
Table 9. CATE estimation performance by layer position (averages ± standard deviations).
FEATURE DEPTH |BIAS| (X) |BIAS| (Xe DD ) |BIAS| (Xe DROP ) RMSE (X) RMSE (Xe DD ) RMSE (Xe DROP )
EARLY 2.38 ± 1.0 227.84 ± 1007.8 1.03 ± 0.6 3.35 ± 0.8 1.04e5 ± 4.0e5 2.1 ± 0.7
MIDDLE 4.50 ± 0.1 0.48 ± 0.1 0.69 ± 0.1 4.77 ± 0.1 1.51 ± 0.3 1.84 ± 0.2
LATE 0.55 ± 0.4 0.21 ± 0.3 0.46 ± 0.4 1.38 ± 0.5 1.02 ± 0.5 1.24 ± 0.5
21